                ----------------------------------------------
                  SEGA GENESIS EMULATOR SAVE STATE REFERENCE
                        First Edition (April 11, 2001)
                              Bart Trzynadlowski
                ----------------------------------------------
                        

---------
  About
---------

The aim of this reference is to document the save state and backup RAM formats
of the various Sega Genesis emulators out there. Distribute this document
freely, but please keep it unmodified. If you use any of this information,
give credit to the contributors and me.

The following people contributed directly and/or indirectly:

    - Charles MacDonald (supplied most of the Genecyst save state information)
    - Jeffrey Quinn (found the SSP and USP in Genecyst states)

More information on any of the formats, especially the KGen format, would be
appreciated. You can reach me at trzy@mailandnews.com or visit my web site at
http://trzy.overclocked.org.

A "byte" is considered to be 8 bits, a "word" is 16 bits, and a "double word"
is 32 bits.


------------------------------
  Genecyst Save State Format
------------------------------

The Genecyst save state format (GST) is used by various emulators. The files
use the extensions GS0-GS9 depending on the save slot. The information in this
section has been validated against Genecyst v0.32b. I believe Version X.XX is
very similar, if not the same, but I would appreciate confirmation.

    Offset Range:       Description:
    -------------       ------------
    0x00000-0x00002     Signature: "GST"
    0x00006             0xE0, apparently used to validate file integrity
    0x00007             0x40, apparently used to validate file integrity
    0x00080-0x0009F     68K registers D0-D7
    0x000A0-0x000BF     68K registers A0-A7
    0x000C8-0x000CB     68K PC
    0x000D0-0x000D1     68K SR
    0x000D2-0x000D5     68K USP
    0x000D6-0x000D9     68K SSP
    0x000FA-0x00112     VDP registers (0-23, 1 byte each)
    0x00112-0x00191     CRAM
    0x00192-0x001E1     VSRAM
    0x001E4-0x003E3     YM2612 registers
    0x00404-0x00437     Z80 registers: AF, BC, DE, HL, IX, IY, PC, SP, AF',
                        BC', DE', HL', I (stored as a double word each.) R is
                        not supported and IM is presumed to be 1
    0x00474-0x002473    Z80 RAM
    0x02478-0x12477     68K RAM
    0x12478-0x22477     VRAM

All data is in little endian format except for 68K RAM, VSRAM, and VRAM, which
are in big endian format. Areas not mentioned should be kept 0.
    Locations 0x00006 and 0x00007 are not completely understood. Genecyst
expects them to be 0xE0 and 0x40, respectively. This has been observed in
Genecyst v0.20, v0.32b, and vX.XX. Many emulators avoid saving these bytes and
Genecyst refuses to load their states.
    The USP and SSP are tricky. If the supervisor bit in SR is set, only the
USP is saved at 0x000D2, the SSP at 0x000D6 is set to 0. If the supervisor bit
is cleared, both the USP at 0x000D2 and the SSP at 0x000D6 are saved. A7 is
also the current stack pointer (SSP if supervisor mode, USP if user mode.)

More information is needed, especially on (but not limited to) the following:

    - PSG state
    - Internal VDP information (control port status, VDP RAM pointer, etc.)
    - Z80 BUSREQ
    - Z80 interrupt flip-flops (IFF1 and IFF2)


------------------------------
  Genecyst Backup RAM Format
------------------------------

Genecyst saves backup RAM in files with the GSV extension. They simply contain
the backup RAM in little endian format. The files do not always have an even
number of bytes.
    Even if backup RAM only appears in the odd or even addresses, Genital
saves the unused bytes (which should be 0.)
    Those emulators which keep the 68K address space in little endian format
can support GSV files easily: simply copy the contents of the files unmodified
to the backup RAM area.
    A few emulators, including Genital, use the GSV format.


----------
  KGen98
----------

There is no official information on KGen's save state format, so I decided to
take it upon myself to try reverse engineering the format. Due to a lack of
time, I have not been able to learn more than is shown here.
    The below information applies to KGen98 v0.4b, I do not know if it applies
to other versions of KGen and KGen98. Any more information is most welcome.

    Offset Range:       Description:
    -------------       ------------
    0x00000-0x00002     Signature: "KSS"
    0x00003             Must be 0x1, also part of the signature
    0x00004-0x00005     ROM checksum, word sized
    0x02098-0x12097     68K RAM
    0x12098-0x22097     VRAM
    0x22098-0x22117 (?) CRAM
    0x22298-0x222E7     VSRAM
    0x2235C-0x2237B     68K registers D0-D7
    0x2237C-0x2239B     68K registers A0-A7
    0x2239C-0x2239F     68K SP (if supervisor mode: USP, if user mode: SSP)
    0x223A0-0x223A3     68K PC
    0x223A4-0x223A7     68K SR (?)
    0x223A8-0x223AB     Unknown, this usually is 0x2700, but sometimes appears
                        the same as the SR value
    0x223AE-0x223C5     VDP registers (0-23, 1 byte each)
    0x2273E-0x227??     Data written to VDP control port
    0x22742-0x22743     Control port half: if only one word of a 2-word
                        command was written, it is stored here
    0x22748-0x22749     Current VDP RAM address

The checksum, 68K RAM, VRAM, and VSRAM are stored in big endian format.
Everything else is in little endian format, except maybe for the CRAM.
    I don't remember exactly how CRAM is stored, but I recall it being in
big endian format and 128 bytes in length. It is possible that I'm mistaken
and that it is stored in either some weird 256 byte format or along with a
palette.
    I believe location 0x2273E is a little endian double word.
    There is plenty of important internal VDP data kept at the end of the
files. I haven't found the meaning of all of it. Also, the path to the save
state's ROM file is saved near the beginning of the file.


-----------------
  Genital v1.2+
-----------------

Starting with Version 1.2, Genital save state files use a version numbering 
system independent from Genital itself. Save states with different major
version numbers are not compatible. The minor version number indicates changes
in the format which do not affect backwards compatibility.

Version 1.0 of this new GNS format is described below:

    Offset Range:       Description:
    -------------       ------------
    0x00000-0x00002     Signature: "GNS"
    0x00003             Format major version
    0x00004             Format minor version
    0x00005-0x00007     Reserved (always keep 0)
    0x00008-0x00057     68K registers and status (from Genital68K context)
    0x00058-0x00077     68K pending interrupts (from Genital68K context)
    0x00078-0x10077     68K RAM
    0x10078-0x20077     VRAM
    0x20078-0x200F7     CRAM
    0x200F8-0x20147     VSRAM
    0x20148-0x201A7     VDP registers (0-23; double word each)
    0x201A8-0x201BF     VDP internal status data (taken directly from VDP
                        context: ctrlport_mode, access_mode, addr, addr_top,
                        dma_mode, and status_register; double word each)
    0x201C0-0x201C3     VDP horizontal interrupt timer
    0x201C4-0x201C7     Reserved (always keep 0)
    0x201C8-0x201CB     Z80 BUSREQ
    0x201CC-0x201EB     Z80 registers (word each: AF, BC, DE, HL, IX, IY, PC, SP,
                        AF', BC', DE', HL', IR, IM, IFF1, IFF2)
    0x201EC-0x221EB     Z80 RAM

Everything is stored in little endian format.
    The 68K registers and status come directly from the Genital68K context,
occupy a double word each, and are ordered:

    D0-D7, A0-A7, SP, SR, PC, status

The "SP" relies on the privilege mode. If in supervisor mode, this is the USP
(and the SSP is in A7.) If in user mode, this is the SSP (and the USP is in
A7.) Please read the Genital68K documentation for information on what the
"status" is (http://trzy.overclocked.org/gen68k.)
    The first 7 elements pending interrupt array correspond to interrupt
levels 1-7. Each element, a double word in size, contains the vector of the
interrupt that is pending. The eight element is the number of interrupts
pending. Again, see the Genital68K documentation for more information.
    The VDP internal status comes directly from Genital's VDP context. The
"ctrlport_mode" indicates which part of a command the control port expects. If
0, it expects the first part, otherwise the second. The access_mode is just
the VDP's CD bits which indicate VRAM write, CRAM write, VSRAM write, VRAM
read, etc. The VDP RAM current address is stored in the "addr" element. Bits
15 and 14 of the VDP RAM address are stored in bits 1 and 0 of "addr_top."
These are used to emulate a peculiar feature of the VDP. The "dma_mode" stores
the DMA mode bits. The "status_register" is the VDP Status Register.
    The "horizontal interrupt timer" is the count-down timer which triggers
horizontal interrupts.


---------------------------
  Genital (v1.0 and v1.1)
---------------------------

The Genital save state format (GNS) was introduced in Genital v1.0 and was
completely changed by v1.2. Versions 1.0 and 1.1 used the format described
below.

    Offset Range:       Description:
    -------------       ------------
    0x00000-0x0FFFF     68K RAM
    0x10000-0x1FFFF     VDP VRAM
    0x20000-0x21FFF     Z80 RAM
    0x22000-0x2207F     VDP CRAM
    0x22080-0x220CF     VDP VSRAM
    0x220D0-0x220EF     68K registers A0-A7
    0x220F0-0x220F3     68K SP (if supervisor mode: USP, if user: SSP)
    0x220F4-0x22113     68K registers D0-D7
    0x22114-0x22117     68K SR
    0x22118-0x2211B     68K PC
    0x2211C-0x2214F     Z80 registers: AF, BC, DE, HL, IX, IY, PC, SP, AF', 
                        BC', DE', HL', IR (stored as a double word each)
    0x22150-0x22153     Z80 BUSREQ
    0x22154-0x221B3     VDP registers (0-23, double word each)
    0x221B4-0x221B7     VDP control port mode
    0x221B8-0x221BB     VDP RAM address pointer
    0x221BC-0x221BF     VDP RAM access mode
    0x221C0-0x221C3     VDP DMA mode
    0x221C4-0x221C7     VDP Status Register
    0x221C8-0x221CB     VDP HV counter
    0x221CC-0x221CF     VDP Horizontal Interrupt timer
    0x221D0-0x221D3     VDP Control Port A15, A14
    0x221D4-0x221DA     Reserved (7 bytes; should be 0)
    0x221DB             Major version number of Genital
    0x221DC             Minor version number of Genital
    0x221DD-0x221DF     Signature: "GNS"

The 68K RAM, VRAM, CRAM, and VSRAM are stored in big endian format. Everything
else is in little endian format.
    The VDP RAM address pointer is the current VRAM, CRAM, or VSRAM address.
The VDP RAM access mode is just the CD bits in a VDP command which indicate
wether the VDP is in VRAM write mode, VRAM read mode, CRAM write mode, etc.
    The VDP Control Port mode indicates which part of the command the VDP is
expecting. This is the "pending flag" described by Charles MacDonald's VDP
document. The A15, A14 bits are those last written to the control port. When
the first word of an address set command is written, these bits are used to
fill in A15, A14. They are stored in bits 1 and 0 of the GNS double word.   
    The major and minor version numbers reflect the version of Genital which
produced the save state. For example, if the state was created with Genital
v1.0, the major version would be 1 and the minor would be 0. The signature
must be "GNS" in ASCII or the save state will be deemed corrupt.
